content/modules/ROOT/pages/module-13.adoc, before:

= Never break the chain

Derived images provide easy branching points to customize deployments from common bases.
However, this can also quickly exceed the ability of a team to manage manually.
The containerized nature of image mode operations means we can use commonly available application pipeline tools and principles to automate these sorts of issues.

In this lab we'll explore this as we expand on the idea of standardized builds and derived images.

[#write-containerfiles]
== Updating the base 

A sharp eyed junior noticed that console arguments we passed had a redundant definition.
On the build host, let's update the config file and remove the duplicate entry.

[source,bash,role="execute",subs=attributes+]
----
cd
----

[source,bash,role="execute",subs=attributes+]
----
nano console_kargs.conf
----

[source,shell,role="execute",subs=attributes+]
----
kargs = ["console=ttyS0,115200n8"]
----

[#build]
== Build and push the image

With any change, leaving some indicator of an update is a good idea. 
Versioning our images is something we did with the application image, so we'll use a `v1.1` tag for this update since it's a very minor change.
[source,bash,role="execute",subs=attributes+]
----
podman build --file Containerfile --tag registry-{guid}.{domain}/base:v1.1
----

[source,bash,role="execute",subs=attributes+]
----
podman push registry-{guid}.{domain}/base:v1.1
----

This brings up a question: how does the application image pull in this new change? 
The `FROM` line of the Containerfile uses the image reference to define the base image.
The reference is made up of[https://oras.land/docs/concepts/reference/,window=_blank] the registry, the repository with an optional namespace, and the tag. 
In this lab, we aren't using namespaces, but if you work with `quay.io` or ghcr.io, you may have seen image names that have a username in them.
If we publish this change with a new tag, that means every Containerfile that references this baseline would need to also be changed.
Red Hat base images use several tags, a `latest` tag that is attached to the most recent image of a major version, a RHEL version tag eg `10.1` that is attached to the latest base of a particular minor version, and a UNIX epoch timestamped verstion tag eg `10.1-1763458003` that stays with a specific image. 
At the time of writing, all three of those tags refer to the same image in the Red Hat catalog.
Tracking static tags provide the most control over updates and image contents, and floating tags provide easier paths for updates.
[source,bash,role="execute",subs=attributes+]
----
podman images base
----
....
REPOSITORY                                   TAG         IMAGE ID      CREATED         SIZE
registry-n96qr.apps.ocpvdev01.rhdp.net/base  v1.1        dec88a35b72d  17 seconds ago  2.49 GB
registry-n96qr.apps.ocpvdev01.rhdp.net/base  latest      662065c7c402  35 minutes ago  2.49 GB
....
There's several ways to address this, we'll discuss two in this lab.

== Stable tags vs automation

One way to deal with this is through the tags themselves.
Tags are just special labels associated with an image, and multiple tags can refer to the same image.

We've got one tag now that carries a semantic version, very helpful for people to understand changes at a glance.
This can update for any change, and signify the impact, like we did for this update.

For our second tag, we can add lifecycle information to indicate where in the SDLC this image is intended to be used: development, testing, or production.
This would let the teams work together on delivering features and updates at any part of the stack without making changes "visible" where we don't want them.

Tags can be applied on the host with podman and then pushed, but we can also add a tag to the image we just pushed to the registry with `skopeo`.
Enterprise registries will also have more features for dealing with tags and other image details.

[source,bash,role="execute",subs=attributes+]
----
skopeo copy docker://registry-{guid}.{domain}/base:v1.1 docker://registry-{guid}.{domain}/base:prod
----
....
Copying blob bd9ddc54bea9 skipped: already exists  
Copying config dec88a35b7 done   | 
Writing manifest to image destination
....

[source,bash,role="execute",subs=attributes+]
----
skopeo list-tags  docker://registry-{guid}.{domain}/base
----
....
{
    "Repository": "registry-n96qr.apps.ocpvdev01.rhdp.net/base",
    "Tags": [
        "v1.1",
        "prod",
        "latest"
    ]
}
....
This may seem like a hassle, which is where processes like GitOps enter the picture.
Image updates in a registry and providing an updated Containerfile is something developers use tools like `renovatebot` and `dependabot` to track.
These tools will allow you to track static tags like `10.1-` for full control over when updates are applied, but still make updates easier by eliminating the toil of tracking and updating the tag names.
The full scope of a GitOps environment is out of the scope of this lab, however you can get more details from our introductory blog post[https://www.redhat.com/en/blog/jumpstart-gitops-image-mode,window=_blank].

Let's update the application Containerfile to track the new `prod` stable tag.

[source,bash,role="execute",subs=attributes+]
----
cd bootc-version
----
[source,bash,role="execute",subs=attributes+]
----
nano Containerfile
----

[source,shell,role="execute",subs=attributes+]
----
FROM registry-{guid}.{domain}/base:prod AS host
----
No need to update the SELinux stage since that uses base RHEL tools to compile the policy

Build this as a simple update, but the same tagging logic can be applied to any bootc image.
[source,bash,role="execute",subs=attributes+]
----
podman build --file Containerfile --tag registry-{guid}.{domain}/app-test:v2
----

The policy stage uses the cache, but the application stage pulls the new image and rebuilds.

And of course push it to the local registry:

[source,bash,role="execute",subs=attributes+]
----
podman push registry-{guid}.{domain}/app-test:v2
----
On Security VM:
[source,bash,role="execute",subs=attributes+]
----
sudo bootc update --soft-reboot=required --apply
----
....
layers already present: 74; layers needed: 16 (122.4 MB)
Fetched layers: 116.78 MiB in 9 seconds (13.17 MiB/s)                                                                    
  Deploying: done (3 seconds)                                                                                            Pruned images: 0 (layers: 0, objsize: 3.2 MB)
Queued for next boot: registry-j475j.apps.ocpvdev01.rhdp.net/app-test:v2
  Version: 10.1
  Digest: sha256:5e480c9db0438c43d808f4aba8277fcdc0a2b69351fa6557e6fd5566a9aa6690
Total new layers: 88    Size: 1.3 GB
Removed layers:   16    Size: 122.4 MB
Added layers:     16    Size: 122.4 MB
error: Upgrading: Handling staged soft reboot: Handling soft reboot: Soft reboot was required but staged deployment is not soft-reboot capable
....

We made a change that can only be affected by a full reboot, so `soft-reboot` will error.

[source,bash,role="execute",subs=attributes+]
----
sudo bootc status
----
The staging of the update was successful however and we can simply reboot. 
The only thing we couldn't do was the soft relaunch of userspace. 
The atomic nature of the updates let's us try to soft-reboot all the time and be notified when a hard reboot is required.

Commit message:

First draft of dev section descriptions

content/modules/ROOT/pages/module-13.adoc, after:

= Never break the chain

Derived images provide easy branching points to customize deployments from common bases.
However, this can also quickly exceed the ability of a team to manage manually.
The containerized nature of image mode operations means we can use commonly available application pipeline tools and principles to automate these sorts of issues.

In this lab we'll explore this as we expand on the idea of standardized builds and derived images.

[#write-containerfiles]
== Updating the base 

A sharp eyed junior noticed that console arguments we passed had a redundant definition.
On the build host, let's update the config file and remove the duplicate entry.

[source,bash,role="execute",subs=attributes+]
----
cd
----

[source,bash,role="execute",subs=attributes+]
----
nano console_kargs.conf
----

Remove the first "console" argument in the list.
[source,shell,role="execute",subs=attributes+]
----
kargs = ["console=ttyS0,115200n8"]
----

[#build]
== Build and push the image

With any change, leaving some indicator of an update is a good idea. 
Versioning our images is something we did with the application image, so we'll use a `v1.1` tag for this update since it's a very minor change.
[source,bash,role="execute",subs=attributes+]
----
podman build --file Containerfile --tag registry-{guid}.{domain}/base:v1.1
----

[source,bash,role="execute",subs=attributes+]
----
podman push registry-{guid}.{domain}/base:v1.1
----

This brings up a question: how does the application image pull in this new change? 
The `FROM` line of the Containerfile uses the image reference to define the base image.
The reference https://oras.land/docs/concepts/reference/[is made up of ,window=_blank] the registry, the repository with an optional namespace, and the tag. 
In this lab, we aren't using namespaces, but if you work with `quay.io` or ghcr.io, you may have seen image names that have a username in them.

If we publish this change with a new tag, that means every Containerfile that references this baseline would need to also be changed.
Red Hat base images use several tags, a `latest` tag that is attached to the most recent image of a major version, a RHEL version tag eg `10.1` that is attached to the latest base of a particular minor version, and a UNIX epoch timestamped verstion tag eg `10.1-1763458003` that stays with a specific image. 
At the time of writing, all three of those tags refer to the same image in the Red Hat catalog.
Tracking static tags provide the most control over updates and image contents, and floating tags provide easier paths for updates.
[source,bash,role="execute",subs=attributes+]
----
podman images base
----
....
REPOSITORY                                   TAG         IMAGE ID      CREATED         SIZE
registry-n96qr.apps.ocpvdev01.rhdp.net/base  v1.1        dec88a35b72d  17 seconds ago  2.49 GB
registry-n96qr.apps.ocpvdev01.rhdp.net/base  latest      662065c7c402  35 minutes ago  2.49 GB
....
There's several ways to address managing changes to images, we'll discuss two in this lab.

== Stable tags vs automation

One way to deal with this is through the tags themselves.
Tags are just special labels associated with an image, and multiple tags can refer to the same image.

We've got one tag now that carries a semantic version, very helpful for people to understand changes at a glance.
This can update for any change, and signify the impact, like we did for this update.

For our second tag, we can add lifecycle information to indicate where in the SDLC this image is intended to be used: development, testing, or production.
This would let the teams work together on delivering features and updates at any part of the stack without making changes "visible" where we don't want them.

Tags can be applied on the host with podman and then pushed, but we can also add a tag to the image we just pushed to the registry with `skopeo`.
Enterprise registries will also have more features for dealing with tags and other image details.

[source,bash,role="execute",subs=attributes+]
----
skopeo copy docker://registry-{guid}.{domain}/base:v1.1 docker://registry-{guid}.{domain}/base:prod
----
....
Copying blob bd9ddc54bea9 skipped: already exists  
Copying config dec88a35b7 done   | 
Writing manifest to image destination
....

[source,bash,role="execute",subs=attributes+]
----
skopeo list-tags  docker://registry-{guid}.{domain}/base
----
....
{
    "Repository": "registry-n96qr.apps.ocpvdev01.rhdp.net/base",
    "Tags": [
        "v1.1",
        "prod",
        "latest"
    ]
}
....
This may seem like a hassle, which is where the second method enters the picture: processes like GitOps based automation.
Image updates in a registry and providing an updated Containerfile is something developers use tools like `renovatebot` and `dependabot` to track.
These tools will allow you to track static tags like `10.1-` for full control over when updates are applied, but still make updates easier by eliminating the toil of tracking and updating the tag names.
The full scope of a GitOps environment is out of the scope of this lab, however you can get more details from https://www.redhat.com/en/blog/jumpstart-gitops-image-mode[our introductory blog post ,window=_blank].

Let's update the application Containerfile to track the new `prod` stable tag.

[source,bash,role="execute",subs=attributes+]
----
cd ~/bootc-version
----
[source,bash,role="execute",subs=attributes+]
----
nano Containerfile
----

Find the second stage `FROM` line and add the new tag.
[source,shell,role="execute",subs=attributes+]
----
FROM registry-{guid}.{domain}/base:prod AS host
----
No need to update the SELinux stage since that uses base RHEL tools to compile the policy

Build this as a simple update, but the same tagging logic can be applied to any bootc image.
[source,bash,role="execute",subs=attributes+]
----
podman build --file Containerfile --tag registry-{guid}.{domain}/app-test:v2
----

The policy stage uses the cache, but the application stage pulls the new image and rebuilds.

And of course push it to the local registry:

[source,bash,role="execute",subs=attributes+]
----
podman push registry-{guid}.{domain}/app-test:v2
----
On Security VM:
[source,bash,role="execute",subs=attributes+]
----
sudo bootc update --soft-reboot=required --apply
----
....
layers already present: 74; layers needed: 16 (122.4 MB)
Fetched layers: 116.78 MiB in 9 seconds (13.17 MiB/s)                                                                    
  Deploying: done (3 seconds)                                                                                            Pruned images: 0 (layers: 0, objsize: 3.2 MB)
Queued for next boot: registry-j475j.apps.ocpvdev01.rhdp.net/app-test:v2
  Version: 10.1
  Digest: sha256:5e480c9db0438c43d808f4aba8277fcdc0a2b69351fa6557e6fd5566a9aa6690
Total new layers: 88    Size: 1.3 GB
Removed layers:   16    Size: 122.4 MB
Added layers:     16    Size: 122.4 MB
error: Upgrading: Handling staged soft reboot: Handling soft reboot: Soft reboot was required but staged deployment is not soft-reboot capable
....

We made a change that can only be affected by a full reboot, so `soft-reboot` will error.

[source,bash,role="execute",subs=attributes+]
----
sudo bootc status -v
----
The staging of the update was successful however and we can simply reboot. 
The only thing we couldn't do was the soft relaunch of userspace. 
The atomic nature of the updates let's us try to soft-reboot all the time and be notified when a hard reboot is required.
